---
title: CheckV
---

Every miner use a mix of signals to try to identify a contig as viral. The enormous diversity, the fact that there are very short phage genomes, and lack of universal markers, makes this process very challenging.

Now that we have some predicted viruses, let's look at their completeness!
[CheckV](https://bitbucket.org/berkeleylab/checkv/src/master/) is a tool developed to assess the quality and completeness of viral genomes assembled from viromes/metagenomes.


CheckV, similarily to geNomad, is also a pipeline we will run *end-to-end* to:

* Remove host contamination on proviruses (uses **HMMs**),
* Estimate genome completeness
* Predict full genomes (Direct terminal repeats, Proviruses, Inverted terminal repeats)


## Installation

We can once again install using mamba/conda as below:
  
```bash
mamba create -n checkv -c conda-forge -c bioconda checkv
conda activate checkv
```

You will find the pre-downloaded database in `$VIROME/checkv-db-v1.5/`

:information_source: How to download the checkV database at home?
  
If you are running this tutorial outside of EBAME VM, you will need to download the checkV database

```bash
  checkv download_database ./
  ```

Don't forget to update your checkV script to point to your database localisation!

## Running CheckV

Now remember to activate the environment and invoke the help message (similar to geNomad above...).

:pencil2: Try to create to run checkV on the predicted viruses from geNomad.


```bash
checkv end_to_end ~/genomad-out/genomad_votus.fna ~/checkv-out -d $VIROME/checkv-db-v1.5/ -t 8
```

The parameters are `<ASSEMBLY>`, `<OUTPUT_DIR>`, `-d <DB_DIR>`, `-t` for the number of threads.


Now you can check the [output files](https://bitbucket.org/berkeleylab/checkv/src/master/README.md#markdown-header-output-files).

With `ls` and `find` you can list them, and if you find a table you can inspect it interactively with `vd` (visidata, press `q` to quit).

In the summary columns, AAI stands for "average amino acid identity", 


To list the files

```bash
ls -lh ~/checkv-out/
```

To inspect the summary table:

```bash
vd checkv-out/quality_summary.tsv 
```

Similarily, you can check the other TSV files.