---
title: Mapping
---


The easiest way to define presence/absence of vOTUs within a sample and then estimate their abundance, 
is by mapping the reads back to the assembly. 

:pencil2: How can we use the BAM files?  We can use automatic tools (like MetaPop) or ... create an Anvi'o database!

There are loads of mappers/aligners available ([BWA](https://github.com/lh3/bwa), [bowtie2](https://github.com/BenLangmead/bowtie2), and [bbmap](https://jgi.doe.gov/data-and-tools/software-tools/bbtools/bb-tools-user-guide/bbmap-guide/) to name a few), but we're going to use [Minimap2](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2).

Whatever mapper you use, it's very likely that you'll use [samtools](https://github.com/samtools/samtools) to process the output.

## Installation 

Here you can create an environment with both minimap2 and samtools installed:

:bulb: When mapping against a subset of contigs, you might want to increase the stringency of the mapping. We won't change the defaults in this tutorial.

```bash
mamba create -n mapping \
  -c conda-forge -c bioconda\
  minimap2 samtools
```

Remember to activate the environment and invoke the help menus as we have done previously. This is a great way to test that you're in the correct environment and your programmes have installed successfully.

## Mapping 

A typical minimap2 command looks like this:

```bash
# DO NOT COPY THIS COMMAND, adapt it before
minimap2 -x sr -a -t 8 <MY_VOTUS.fa> <reads-R1.fq.gz> <reads-R2.fq.gz>  > output.sam 
```
Where:

* `-x sr` means to configure the parameters in *short reads* mode
* `-t 8` means using 8 cores
* the positional parameters are the reference (VOTUSS), R1 and R2 reads
* `>` redirects the output to a text file (SAM format)

To produce the sorted bam file, we can **pipe** the output directly to samtools:

```bash
# DO NOT COPY THIS COMMAND, adapt it before
minimap2 -x sr -a -t 8 <VOTUS> <R1.fq.gz> <R2.fq.gz> | samtools view -bS -F4 - | samtools sort --write-index -@ 8 -o "X.bam" -
```

There's a lot going on in this command (because it's actually three commands separated by pipes (`|`) :open_mouth:),
be sure to look up what pipes are, and what the minimap2 parameters might be doing.

The alignments will be saved in BAM files.
You should look up what BAM files are and what the difference is between BAM and SAM...

For the bam file to be usable in Anvi'o, you will need to index your bam file. 
You can use Samtools to do this:

```bash
# DO NOT COPY THIS COMMAND, adapt it before
samtools index -b <sample_X.bam> 
```


:pencil2: Do you want to try yourself?

* Create a directory where to store the alignments (eg. `~/bams/`)
* Use the structure of the above command to map the reads from sample_01 to the vOTUs you created earlier.
* Optionally, map all the other samples


### EBAME commands

You can process the files manually:

```bash

mkdir -p ~/bams/
VOTUS=derep_votus.fasta

minimap2 -x sr -a -t 6 $VOTUS $VIROME/ERR6797443_R{1,2}.fastq.gz | samtools view -bS -F4 - | samtools sort --write-index -@ 4 -o ~/bams/sample_1.bam -
minimap2 -x sr -a -t 6 $VOTUS $VIROME/ERR6797444_R{1,2}.fastq.gz | samtools view -bS -F4 - | samtools sort --write-index -@ 4 -o ~/bams/sample_2.bam -
minimap2 -x sr -a -t 6 $VOTUS $VIROME/ERR6797443_R{1,2}.fastq.gz | samtools view -bS -F4 - | samtools sort --write-index -@ 4 -o ~/bams/sample_3.bam -
```


## Making a loop

> See [bash loops](https://telatin.github.io/microbiome-bioinformatics/Bash-tutorial-2/) tutorial

As you see from many Anvi'o tutorials, when you repeat the same command over multiple files you can make a loop.
Here we will make a loop using multiple temporary variables as we have paired end reads to deal with.

It is a good idea to draft the loop initially to only *print* the variables to see if everything is right:

```bash
for R1 in $VIROME/*_R1.fastq.gz;
do
   R2=${R1/_1/_2}
   BASE=$(basename $R1 | cut -f 1 -d _)

   echo "Mapping sample: $BASE"
   #... complete this
done
```


Explanation:
- `for R1 in $VIROME/*_1.fastq.gz;`: This line starts the loop, iterating over all files in the `$VIROME` directory that end with `_1.fastq.gz` (typically forward reads in paired-end sequencing).
- `R2=${R1/_1/_2}`: This creates the filename for the reverse read by replacing `_1` with `_2` in the `R1` filename.
- `BASE=$(basename $R1 | cut -f 1 -d _)`: This extracts the sample name from the filename.
  - `basename $R1`: Gets the filename without the path.
  - `cut -f 1 -d _`: Cuts the string at the first underscore, keeping only the part before it.
- `echo $BASE`: Prints the sample name, useful for debugging.



we now have the paired files in `$R1` and `$R2` respectively, and the sample name extracted from the read file in `$BASE`.

```bash
OUTDIR=bam_files
# Put your fasta VOTU in REF!
REF=...
mkdir -p "$OUTDIR"
for R1 in "$VIROME"/*_1.fastq.gz;
do
   R2=${R1/_1/_2}
   BASE=$(basename $R1 | cut -f 1 -d _)
   # Let's also check if R2 exists:
   if [[ ! -e "$R2" ]]; then
      echo "[$BASE] Processing $R1 (R1), R2 was not found: $R2"
      exit 1;
   fi
   minimap2 -x sr -a -t 6 "$REF" "$R1" "$R2" | samtools view -F4 - | samtools sort -@ 4 -o "$OUTDIR"/"$BASE".bam -
   samtools index "$OUTDIR"/"$BASE".bam 
done
```


Explanation:

- `OUTDIR=bam_files`: Sets the output directory for BAM files.
- `REF=...`: You should set this to the path of your reference genome file.
- `mkdir -p "$OUTDIR"`: Creates the output directory if it doesn't exist.
- The loop structure is similar to the basic example, but now we're processing the files:
  - `minimap2`: Aligns the reads to the reference genome.
    - `-x sr`: Sets the mode for short reads.
    - `-a`: Generates SAM output.
    - `-t 6`: Uses 6 threads.
  - `samtools view -F4`: Converts SAM to BAM and filters out unmapped reads.
  - `samtools sort`: Sorts the BAM file.
    - `-@ 4`: Uses 4 threads for sorting.
  - `samtools index`: Indexes the sorted BAM file for faster access.

This loop efficiently processes all paired-end read files in the `$VIROME` directory, aligning them to a reference genome, converting to sorted BAM files, and indexing the results.

Remember to replace the `$REF` variable with the actual path to your reference genome before running this script.

## Exploring your data with Anvi'o

You can do the Anvi'o data processing yourself on your own computer using the anvio install that you have used earlier in the week. We will provide the necessary files for you to download from Dropbox so you don't have to worry about downloading your files from the VM.

:warning: The filenames in the dropbox download might be slightly different, but the content will be the same
